# Installing Basic Tools

{% panel style="info", title="What you should do in this section" %}

1. Read the whole text carefully.
2. Try the commands of Linux mentioned.
3. Install all basic tools mentioned.
4. Learn to use Vim as the text editor.
5. Answer all the questions given in the quoting part.

{% endpanel %}

After installing the Debian, we call only use several simple tools provided by the operating system, we cannot even edit a text file easily (maybe you can try `vi`?) so we should install some basic tools which is useful and tiny.

## Preparation

Run the VM you created already, login as normally privileged account (which is pinyin of your name) then follow the instructions below:

Now you are going to install some tools from the Debian image for convinence. First "insert" the Debian image: Click `Devices` in the menu bar in the VM window, navigate to `Optical Drives`, click `Choose disk image`, then select the Debian image file. Then add the sources in the image to the APT's list by the following command:

```bash
apt-cdrom add
```

You will see the following prompt:

```
Please insert a Disc in the drive and press enter
```

Since you have already "inserted the Disc" just now, press the `Enter` key, and you will see some message is output. Read them, you will find an error labeled with "Permission denied". Switch to the root account and execute the above command again, you will find that the command is executed without errors. Now you can install the following tools.

## Installing Tools from Debian Image 

The image just provide us with some limited but essential stuffs, we will install them first and install more tools in the next section.

### sudo

```bash
apt install sudo
```

`sudo` allows you to execute a command as another user (usually root). This means you do not need to switch to the root account to execute a system administration command or modify a file owned by root. But before you can use `sudo`, you should add your user account to the sudo group:

```bash
addgroup jack sudo
```

Replace "jack" above with your username. To let the above command go into effect, you should login the system again. 

However, you will receive an error message:

```bash
-bash: addgroup: command not found
```

This error is due to the property of the `su` command - it can only switch your identity to root without the environment variables. So you should type:

```bash
su - 
```

To switch to the root account completely. And then add your user account to the sudo group:

```bash
addgroup jack sudo
```

Type

```bash
exit
```

to go back to your user account. **And `exit` again to logout, then login again.** Now you can use `sudo`. If you find an operation requires root permission, append `sudo` before that operation. For example,

```bash
username@hostname:~$ sudo poweroff
```

Note that running `sudo` may require password. This password is your user account password, not the root one.

{% panel style="warning", title="Why use 'sudo' instead of 'su'? " %}

You may consider `sudo` unnecessary, because you can always perform all operations with the root account. But this may take your system at risk. Can you figure out why?

In fact, all operations related to system changing require root permission. If a malicious program obtains root permission, it can do very bad things, such as deleting system files, to destory your system! Therefore, if an operation can be performed without root permission, perform it without root permission.

{% endpanel %}

### vim

```bash
sudo apt install vim
```

`vim` is called [编辑器之神](https://www.cnblogs.com/batcom/archive/2013/04/25/3042426.html). You will use `vim` for coding in all PAs and Labs, as well as editing other files. Maybe some of you prefer to other editors requiring GUI environment (such Visual Studio). However, you can not use them in some situations, especially when you are accessing a physically remote server:

- the remote server does not have GUI installed, or
- the network condition is so bad that you can not use any GUI tools.

In these situations, `vim` is still a good choice. If you prefer to `emacs`, you can download and install `emacs`from network mirrors after the APT sources file is configured. We will lead you to configure vim later.

### ssh

```bash
sudo apt install openssh-server
```

`ssh` is a tool for remote accessing. Using `ssh` in the experiment can take some advantage of the host system. For `ssh` configuration,  we will explain it alter.

## Learning Vim

You are going to be asked to modify a file using `vim`. For most of you, this is the first time to use `vim`. The operations in `vim` are quite different from other editors you have ever used. To learn `vim`, you need a tutorial. There are two ways to get tutorials:

- Issue the `vimtutor` command in terminal. This will launch a tutorial for `vim`. This way is recommended, since you can read the tutorial and practice at the same time.

- Search the Internet with keyword "vim 教程", and you will find a lot of tutorials about `vim`. Choose some of them to read, meanwhile you can practice with the a temporary file by

  ```bash
  vim test
  ```

**PRACTICE IS VERY IMPORTANT. You can not learn anything by only reading the tutorials. **

{% panel style="info", title="Some games operated with vim" %}

Here are some games to help you master some basic operations in `vim`. Have fun!

- [Vim Adventures](http://vim-adventures.com/)
- [Vim Snake](http://www.vimsnake.com/)
- [Open Vim Tutorials](http://www.openvim.com/tutorial.html)
- [Vim Genius](http://www.vimgenius.com/)

{% endpanel %}

**Remove the Debian image as soon as you finished all items above** to prevent entering installation when you boot the VM next time.

---

*That's everything in PA0.3.*





